.. _controller:

Controller
==========
The controller’s purpose is to interface an ONI hardware system with the host
computer. It aggregates and routes device data and provides transparent access
to all devices, independently of their physical location. The host also
contains a common clock that is used to timestamp data from all devices,
independently of their origin hub.

Communication between the controller and the host computer shall occur over
four abstract communication channels:

#. **Read**: Read-only, high-bandwidth stream of device output samples from
   controller to host.
#. **Write**: Write-only, high-bandwidth stream of device input samples from
   host to controller.
#. **Signal**: Read-only stream of short-messages and asynchronous hardware
   events from controller to host.
#. **Configuration**: Bidirectional, addressed access to device registers.

API access to all these channels is blocking, i.e.: an API call that accesses
any channel will not return until the requested transaction on that channel is
complete. Concurrent access to a single channel by different threads is NOT
permitted. However, channels are independent and concurrent access to
*different* channels MUST be permitted. A stream transaction is defined as a
blocking read or write of a set number of bytes, while a register transaction
is defined as a single register read or write cycle to an individual address.

The required characteristics of these channels are described in the following
sections. A complete understanding of their use during software development
requires an undersanding of the the :ref:`oni-api`.

.. _data-rd-chan:

Read Channel
------------

-  **Word size** : 32 bits
-  **Channel type** : Stream
-  **Direction** : Read

The *read* channel provides high bandwidth communication from the controller to
the host computer. Data from the read stream of all devices that support is is
aggregated and multiplexed by the controller and sent to the host through this
channel.

Data should be pushed to this channel as quickly as possible. It is the
responsibility of the host computer to read data from the stream quickly enough
to keep up with data production by the controller. Therefore, it is highly
recommended that an ONI system implements some kind of internal buffering to
ameliorate the effects of uneven reading times caused by computer operating
systems or other software limitations.

.. _frame:

Data Frames
~~~~~~~~~~~

Data from the read channel is packed in frames. Each frame contains data from a
single device :ref:`sample <dev-sample>`. The frame format is:

::

    uint64  Common_Timestamp
    uint32  Device_Address
    uint32  Sample_Size
    var     Sample

Where

- ``Common_Timestamp``: A counter common to all devices generated by the
  controller common acquisition clock.
- ``Device_Address``: The address of the device producing the data, as featured
  on the :ref:`device table <dev-table>`.
- ``Sample_Size``: The full size of the sample, and must be equal to the
  ``Read_Sample_Size`` field of the :ref:`device descriptor <dev-desc>`.
- ``Sample``: The complete data sample as described on the :ref:`device sample
  format <dev-sample>` section.

.. _data-wr-chan:

Write Channel
-------------

-  **Word size** : 32 bits
-  **Channel type** : Stream
-  **Direction** : Write

The *write* channel provides high bandwidth communication from the host computer
to the controller, used to send data to the devices.

Data is sent with a :ref:`frame <frame>` format identical to the one used for
read, but without the ``Common_Timestamp`` field. It is the responsibility of
the controller to accept frames at any rate the computer might be sending them.
Currently, there is no defined mechanism to inform the host of any possible
dropped frame on the write channel, although this can be included in an
implementation so long as it does not invalidate other any other ONI
requirements.

.. _sig-chan:

Signal channel
--------------

-  **Word size** : 8 bits
-  **Channel type** : Stream
-  **Direction** : Read

The *signal* channel provides a way for the controller to inform the host of
configuration results, which may be provided with a significant delay.
Additionally, it is the channel over which the controller send the device table
to the host following a system reset. Signal data MUST be framed into packets
using Consistent Overhead Byte Stuffing
(`COBS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistent_Overhead_Byte_Stuffing>`__).
Within this scheme, packets are delimited using 0’s and always have the
following format:

::

   ... | PACKET_FLAG, data0, data1, ..., data_k | ...

where ``PACKET_FLAG`` is 32-bit unsigned integer with a single unique bit
setting, ``|`` represents a packet delimiter (in this case, 0), “``,``” are for
visual clarity and are not actually in the data stream, and ``...`` represents
other packets. This stream can be read and ignored until a desired packet is
received. Reading this stream shall block if no data is available, which allows
asynchronous configuration acknowledgment. Valid ``PACKET_FLAG``\ s are:

============ ========== =====================================
Flag         Value      Description
============ ========== =====================================
NULLSIG      0x00000001 Null signal, ignored by host
CONFIGWACK   0x00000002 Configuration write-acknowledgment
CONFIGWNACK  0x00000004 Configuration no-write-acknowledgment
CONFIGRACK   0x00000008 Configuration read-acknowledgment
CONFIGRNACK  0x00000010 Configuration no-read-acknowledgment
DEVICETABACK 0x00000020 Device table start acknowledgment
DEVICEINST   0x00000040 Device descriptor instance
============ ========== =====================================

Following a hardware reset, the signal channel is used to provide the
:ref:`device table <dev-table>` to the host using the following packet
sequence:

::

   ... | DEVICETABACK, uint32 num_devices
       | DEVICEINST, uint32 dev_addr_0, device_descriptor dev_0
       | DEVICEINST, uint32 dev_addr_1, device_descriptor dev_1 |
       ...
       | DEVICEINST, uint32 dev_addr_n, device_descriptor dev_n | ...

Where ``dev_addr_n`` is the full address of each device as described in the
:ref:`device table <dev-table>` section and ``dev_n`` is a :ref:`device
descriptor <dev-desc>`.

In addition to providing the device table following reset, the signal channel
is also used to asynchronously acknowledge register access via the
:ref:`configuration channel <conf-chan>`. Following a device register read or
write, an CONFIGWACK, CONFIGWNACK, CONFIGRACK, or CONFIGRNACK signal is pushed
onto the signal stream by the controller to indicate the validity of the
transaction. For instance, on a successful register read:

::

    ... | CONFIGRACK | ...

.. _conf-chan:

Configuration Channel
---------------------

-  **Word size** : 32 bits
-  **Channel type** : Register
-  **Direction** : Read-Write

The *configuration* channel supports addressed access to a set of configuration
registers. There are two classes of registers handled by the configuration
channel: the first set of registers encapsulates a generic device register
programming interface. The remaining registers are for global controller
control and configuration and provide access to acquisition parameters and
state control.

The interface must use 32-bit values and, at least, 24-bit addressing. The
required register map is as follows:

========== ========================= ==================
Address    Name                      Type
========== ========================= ==================
0x00000000 Device Address            Register interface
0x00000001 Register Address          Register interface
0x00000002 Register Value            Register interface
0x00000003 Read/Write                Register interface
0x00000004 Trigger                   Register interface
0x00000005 Running                   Global
0x00000006 Reset                     Global
0x00000007 System Clock              Global
0x00000008 Acquisition Clock         Global
0x00000009 Reset Acquisition Counter Global
0x0000000A Hardware Address          Global
========== ========================= ==================

Device Register Programming Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The device programming interface allows transparent access to each device’s
:ref:`register map <dev-reg-map>`. It defines a general purpose bus that hides
the specifics of any particular implementation. It is composed of the following
configuration channel registers:

- ``Device Address``: The fully qualified address of a device as enumerated in
  the :ref:`device table <dev-table>` and to which communication will be
  directed as described below.

- ``Register Address``: The address of the register within the :ref:`register
  map <dev-reg-map>` of the device located at ``Device Address`` that will be
  written to or read from.

- ``Register Value``: Value to be written to or read from and that corresponds
  to the register ``Register Address`` of device located at
  ``Device   Address``.

- ``Read/Write``: A flag indicating if a read or write should be performed. 0
  indicates read operation. A value > 0 indicates write operation.

- ``Trigger``: Set > 0 to trigger either register read or write operation
  depending on the state of ``Read/Write``. If ``Read/Write`` is 0, a read is
  performed. In this case, after a successful operation, ``Register Value`` is
  updated with value stored in the register at ``Register Address`` on the
  device at ``Device Address``. If ``Read/Write`` is 1, ``Register Value`` is
  written to register at ``Register Address`` on the device at
  ``Device Address``. The ``Trigger`` register is always be set low by the
  controller following transmission even if it is not successful or does not
  make sense given the supplied register address and/or value.

Appropriate values of ``Register Address`` and ``Register Value`` are
determined by:

- Looking at a device’s data sheet if the device is an integrated circuit and
  using :ref:`raw registers <reg-type>`.
- Examining the :ref:`ONI Device Datasheet <dev-datasheet>` for :ref:`managed
  registers <reg-type>`.

Register Read Sequence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
When a host requests a device register *read*, the following following sequence
must be performed:

1. Check the value of ``Trigger``.

   -  If it is 0, the procedure can proceed.
   -  Else, the hardware is busy with a previous transaction and a new one
      cannot be issued.

2. The target device is selected by writing its address, as featured on the
   device map, into ``Device Address`` on the controller
3. The desired register address within the device register map is written into
   ``Register Address`` on the controller.
4. The ``Read/Write`` register on the controller is set to 0x00.
5. The ``Trigger`` register on the controller is set to 0x01, triggering
   configuration transmission.

   1. (Controller) A register read is routed by the controller to the
      appropriate device.
   2. (Controller) ``Trigger`` is set to 0x00 once the operation finishes.
   3. (Controller) ``CONFIGRACK`` is pushed into the signal stream if the
      operation was successful, ``CONFIGRNACK`` is pushed if it failed.

6. The signal stream must be pumped until either ``CONFIGRACK`` or
   ``CONFIGRNACK`` is received indicating that controller has either:

   -  Completed reading the specified device register and copied its value to
      the ``Register Value`` register.
   -  Failed to read the register in which case the value of ``Register Value``
      contains invalid data.

7. If operation was successful, the ``Register Value`` can be read

Register Write Sequence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
When a host requests a device register *write*, the following following
sequence must be performed:

1. Check the value of ``Trigger``.

   -  If it is 0, the procedure can proceed.
   -  Else, the hardware is busy with a previous transaction and a new one
      cannot be issued.

2. The target device is selected by writing its address, as featured on the
   device map, into ``Device Address`` on the controller
3. The desired register address within the device register map is written into
   ``Register Address`` on the controller.
4. The ``Read/Write`` register on the controller is set to 0x01.
5. The ``Trigger`` register on the controller is set to 0x01, triggering
   configuration transmission.

   1. (Controller) A register write is routed by the controller to the
      appropriate device.
   2. (Controller) ``Trigger`` is set to 0x00 once the operation finishes.
   3. (Controller) ``CONFIGWACK`` is pushed into the signal stream if the
      operation was successful, ``CONFIGWNACK`` is pushed if it failed.

6. The signal stream must be pumped until either ``CONFIGWACK`` or
   ``CONFIGWNACK`` is received indicating that the controller has either:

   -  Successfully completed writing the specified device register
   -  Failed to write the register

Following successful or unsuccessful device register read or write, the
appropriate ACK or NACK packets *must* be passed to the :ref:`signal channel
<sig-chan>` by the controller. If they are not, the register read and write
calls will block indefinitely.

Global Acquisition Registers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The following global acquisition registers provide information about, and
control over, the entire acquisition system:

- ``Running``: Set to > 0 to run the system clock and produce data. Set to 0 to
  stop the system clock and therefore stop data flow. Results in no other
  configuration changes.

- ``Reset``: Set to > 0 to trigger a hardware reset and send a fresh device
  map to the host. Devices are reset but their manages registers might remain
  unchanged, depending on their configuration (See the :ref:`Device registers
  <dev-register>` section for more information). Set to 0 by the controller
  upon entering the reset state.

- ``System Clock``: A read-only register specifying the master hardware clock
  frequency in Hz. This is the clock used by the controller to perform data
  transmission.

- ``Acquisition Clock``: A read-only register specifying the system common
  clock frequency in Hz. This clock is used to generate an acquisition counter
  that timestamps data from all the devices. The ``Common_Timestamp`` in the
  read :ref:`frame <frame>` header is incremented at this frequency.

- ``Reset Acquisition Counter``: This register is used to reset the counter
  generating the ``Common_Timestamp`` used in the :ref:`device frames <frame>`.
  A value if 1 will reset the counter to 0 without affecting the ``Running``
  state. A value of 2 will reset the counter and, at the same time, set
  ``Running`` to 1, starting data production.

- ``Hardware Address``: This is used for systems that allow multiple
  controllers with a link between them to synchronize their
  ``Common_Timestamps``. When resetting the acquisition counter through the
  ``Reset acquisition counter`` on a device with a ``Hardware Address`` of 0,
  this command will be sent through an external link to all non-zero devices,
  synchronizing the counters. Multiple controller support or hardware-based
  timestamp synchronization through dedicated links are optional features of an
  ONI system.

